Secondary index docs (#367)
tigrisdata/tigris-docs: docs/concepts/database/indexes.mdx

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

# Secondary Indexes

> Tigris supports adding secondary indexes to fields in a collection. Adding an index to a field will allow for

Reviewer: Does this go into enough detail regarding explaining what a secondary index is? Are we assuming too much knowledge?

fast efficient queries when using the indexed field with [Filters](filters.md).

## Creating Indexes

An index can be created for a field by updating the schema and adding `index: true` for the field and then
update or create the collection. If the collection is being created for the first time then the index is ready to go

> and will be used once there are documents in the collection. If this is an existing collection, then you need to log into

Reviewer: How does this work for anyone using the self-hosted version of Tigris where there isn't a console?

Reviewer: Link to limitations section?

Author: This is temporary and will go away soon. So for self-hosted there is an endpoint a user could use. but we don't want to advertise that endpoint to much.

the Web Console to build the indexes.

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="js" label="JavaScript">

> ```typescript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```ts
```

@TigrisCollection("catalog")
export class Catalog {
  @PrimaryKey({ order: 1, autogenerate: true })
  id?: number;

  @Field({ index: true })
  name: string;

  @Field({ index: true })
  price: number;

  @Field()
  brand: string;
}

const tigrisClient = new Tigris();
// ensure branch exists, create it if it needs to be created dynamically
await tigrisClient.getDatabase().initializeBranch();
// register schemas
await tigrisClient.registerSchemas([Catalog]);
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="go" label="Go">

```go
Type Catalog struct {
	Id         int `tigris:"primary_key,autoGenerate"`
	Name       string `tigris:"index"`
	Price      float64 `tigris:"index"`
	Brand      string `tigris:"index"`
}

err := db.CreateCollections(ctx, &Catalog{})
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> ## Building indexes in the Web Console

Reviewer: Link to limitations section?

TBD....

## Query and Filters

Secondary indexes support all the filters defined in the [filters](filters.md) section.
The index planner will analyze the filter to try and find a field that matches a defined index.
If it cannot find an appropriate index, it will do a full document scan for the collection.

### Using `_tigris_created_at` and `_tigris_updated_at`

> Tigris has two default indexes that are created to query a collection by when a document was created or
> when a document was added. `_tigris_created_at` will return documents in the order they were created in from earliest to last created.
> `_tigris_updated_at` will return documents in the order they were updated. If a document has not been updated, then the updated field will be null. This index will first return all documents that have not been updated followed by the earliest to lastest updated documents

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tigris has two default indexes created to query a collection by:

 1.  `_tigris_created_at`: When a document was created or when a document was added.  `_tigris_created_at` will return documents in the order they were created, from earliest to last created.
2: `_tigris_updated_at`: When the document was last updated. `_tigris_created_at` will return documents in the order they were updated. If a document has not been updated, the updated field will be `null`. This index will first return all documents that have not been updated, followed by the earliest to latest updated documents
```

These indexes can be queried:

```typescript

> userCollection.find({ filter: { _tigris_created_at: { $gte: null } } });

Reviewer: What does greater than `null` mean? I'd assume greater than should be used with a number type. Is this common in DBs?

Author: This is common. This is find me all the documents in that index.

```

### Missing fields

Tigris indexes are a non-sparse index and will index a missing field as `null`.
So if a query has a filter on a field:

```js
collection.findMany({ name: { $gte: null } });
```

The index will return all documents in the collection even if the field is missing
in the document.

## Explain endpoint

To understand which index a query used, an `explain` query can be run

> that will give more information on the query. The explain query will return
> the following information:
> 
> ```json
> {
>   // The collection that the explain response is run against
>   collection: "collection name",
>   // The Type of read can be either Primary Index scan or Secondary Index
>   read_type: "primary index" || "secondary index" ;
>   // The filter used in the query
>   filter: {myField: {"$gte": 10}};
>   // The ranges used to query the index
>   keyRangeList: [ "10", "$TIGRIS_MAX"],
>   // The field used for the query
>   field: "myField"
> }
> ```

Reviewer: Suggesting an update so the JSON shown is valid JSON.

```suggestion
that will give more information on the query. The explain query will return
a JSON payload with the following properties:

- `collection`: The collection that the explain response is run against
- `read_type`:  // The Type of read can be either Primary Index scan or Secondary Index. Valid values are `primary index` or `secondary index`
- `filter`: The filter used in the query
- `keyRangeList`: The ranges used to query the index
- `field`: The field used for the query

For example:

```json
{
  collection: "collection name",
  read_type: "primary index",
  filter: {myField: {"$gte": 10}},
  keyRangeList: [ "10", "$TIGRIS_MAX"],
  field: "myField"
}
```
```

See the SDK's for how to use the explain endpoint.

## Index Status

> An index can be in two states depending on whether the index can be used for
> querying or if the index is still being updated:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An index can be in one of two states depending on whether the index can be used for
querying or if the index is still being updated:
```

- `INDEX WRITE MODE`: The index is still being updated
- `INDEX ACTIVE`: The index is ready and being used for querying

If an index is added to an existing collection with documents, the index state will `INDEX WRITE MODE`
while Tigris processes all the current documents and creates the indexes for the indexed fields.

> The index status for indexes can be fetched from the system using the `DescribeCollection`

Reviewer: Where can the reader get more info on `DescribeCollection`?

Author: This is missing. We need a section on the collection operations a SDK can do

The index planner will analyze the filter to try and find a field that matches a defined index.
If it cannot find an appropriate index, it will do a full document scan for the collection.

### Using `_tigris_created_at` and `_tigris_updated_at`

Tigris has two default indexes that are created to query a collection by when a document was created or
when a document was added. `_tigris_created_at` will return documents in the order they were created in from earliest to last created.
`_tigris_updated_at` will return documents in the order they were updated. If a document has not been updated, then the updated field will be null. This index will first return all documents that have not been updated followed by the earliest to lastest updated documents

These indexes can be queried:

```typescript
userCollection.find({ filter: { _tigris_created_at: { $gte: null } } });
```

### Missing fields

Tigris indexes are a non-sparse index and will index a missing field as `null`.
So if a query has a filter on a field:

```js
collection.findMany({ name: { $gte: null } });
```

The index will return all documents in the collection even if the field is missing
in the document.

## Explain endpoint

> 

Reviewer 2: Do you want to have code sample here as well?

To understand which index a query used, an `explain` query can be run
that will give more information on the query. The explain query will return
the following information:

```json
{
  // The collection that the explain response is run against
  collection: "collection name",
  // The Type of read can be either Primary Index scan or Secondary Index
  read_type: "primary index" || "secondary index" ;
  // The filter used in the query
  filter: {myField: {"$gte": 10}};
  // The ranges used to query the index
  keyRangeList: [ "10", "$TIGRIS_MAX"],
  // The field used for the query
  field: "myField"
}
```

## Index Status

An index can be in two states depending on whether the index can be used for

> querying or if the index is still being built:

Reviewer 2: Briefly describe what you mean by index being built
